# Let & Const

- Topic to cover
    
    Scope
    
    let
    
    - block scope vs function scope
    - Temporal Dead Zone
    
    const
    

ES6 introduced two new keywords that allows us to define variables:

1. let
2. const

Before ES6 we were creating variables by using var  keyword.

```python
var author = 'MERN';

```

In the above code we have used equals sign to assign the value to the variable residing in the left hand side.

Now whenever we need to use the variable then simply we need to write the variable name ie author which refer to the value 'MERN'.

Can we create variables without using var keyword?

Yes, we can, but this is discouraged as it will be created as undeclared global variable. 

But here the question is what do we mean by global variable?

**SCOPE**

In programming language we have this idea of scope.

When we define a variable it is scoped to a specific section of code. Let's see the concept by the help of below code

```jsx
var rocket = 'Chandrayaan2'

function launch(){
    console.log("launching .." + rocket);
}

launch();// launching ..Chandrayaan2
```

In the above example, we have created a variable called rocket and it has been created outside of our launch function. Because it was created outside of the function it will be accessible inside of it via a closure. When a function is defined in JavaScript it will capture the variables that were available to it and make them available inside of the function.

So when we run launch(); we see the text launching ..Chandrayaan2 in console.

If we changed the definition of the rocket variable so that is it is defined inside of a function called rocketName(), our launch function will not work

```jsx
//defining the variable inside a function
function roketName(){
      var rocket = 'Chandrayaan2';
}
  

function launch(){
    console.log("launching .." + rocket);
}

launch();
```

output:

```jsx
VM117 scope.js:8 
        
       Uncaught ReferenceError: rocket is not defined
    at launch (VM116 scope.js:8)
    at VM116 scope.js:12
launch @ VM117 scope.js:8
(anonymous) @ VM117 scope.js:12

        
      
```

From above discussion we came to know variables created with var keyword are function scoped, so unless they are created outside of a function, we will have no access to them. So in above code we are not able to access the rocket variable.

**let**

In ES6 one of the new keywords is let, and its usage is just like var keyword only. ie

```jsx
let author = 'Deepak';
```

In above code we created a variable author whose value is Deepak.

The one key difference here is that a variable defined with the let keyword is a **block scoped variable, but the variable created with var keyword is function scoped variable.**

What is block scope and what is function scope?

When we looked at var keyword, we saw that if we defined a variable inside of a function, it created the variable there only, and it is available inside of that function only not outside of it .

```jsx
function setName(){
	var name = 'Deepak';
}
console.log(name);
```

If we declared a variable using var keyword inside of a block statement, or anything with {} l(like conditional statements), it will make that make that variable outside of that block simply.

```jsx
if(true){
	var name= 'Rohan';
}
console.log(name);
```

output

```jsx
Rohan
```

Now lets create the same problem with let keyword

```jsx
if(true){
	let name= 'Rohan';
}
console.log(name);
```

Variables defined with let will behave the same inside of a function as a variable defined with var keyword.

However, now we have benifit of block scope.

One place this concept works particularly well is when we are creating a variable to use in  a for loop . 

Since var is function scoped it does not create a value that stays inside the loop.

```jsx
for(var i = 0;i<10;i++){
 console.log(i);
}
console.log(i)
```

output

```jsx
0
let.js:2 1
let.js:2 2
let.js:2 3
let.js:2 4
let.js:2 5
let.js:2 6
let.js:2 7
let.js:2 8
let.js:2 9
let.js:4 10
```

IF we will change the var keyword with the let keyword then the behaviour of the program is going to be changed

```jsx
for(let i = 0;i<10;i++){
 console.log(i);
}
console.log(i)
```

output

```jsx
let.js:4 Uncaught ReferenceError: i is not defined
    at let.js:4
```

**Temporal Dead Zone**

There are more anomalies(gotcha) that I want to point out, and this is something called the Temporal Dead Zone. In javascript, when the browser interprets your code it will do a pass where it looks for any declarations. 

However, it will not assign the value yet. Because of this it is possible to use variables before it has a value: in that case it will simply print udefined.

```jsx
console.log(name)//undefined
var name = 'deepak'
console.log(name)
```

The browser knows there is a variable called name, it just doesn't know what the value is.

With the new let keyword, there is no longer such case

```jsx
console.log(name)
let name = 'deepak'
```

output

```jsx
gotchas.js:1 Uncaught ReferenceError: name is not defined
    at gotchas.js:1
```

**const**

The const keyword behaves like let keyword ie it is block scoped, but there is one difference that is pretty important. When you declare a variable with const it creates a read-only value, meaning you can use the value stored in it, but you can not reassign the value.

 

```jsx
const name = 'deepak'
name = 'ajay';
console.log(name)
```

output

```jsx
Uncaught SyntaxError: Identifier 'name' has already been declared
```

Before const, a common convention was to use uppercase name to hint that the value stored in this variable is a const value.

```jsx
var API_KEY = 'dhgoastyowehgs896sdahglsgh';
```

The obvious problem with this above code is it could be reassigned whenever we want. with const this is not possible.

```jsx
const api_key = 'dhgoastyowehgs896sdahglsgh';
api_key = 'changed key'// Uncaught SyntaxError: Identifier 'name' has already been declared
```

We have seen trying to reassign the value throws a Uncaught SyntaxError, which is great. If we define a variable to be constant, we want to make sure it behaves just like that only.

**Not immutable**

Even we can change in the value of the const variables. There is another small anomaly to watch out

let's try to create an object with reference variable with const type 

```jsx
const name = {
	fname:'deepak'
}

```

Since we know that the const variable is  a read-only value, we might assume that altering the object would throw an error, however this is not the case.

```jsx
name.fname = 'ajay';
console.log(name)
name.lname = 'sarkar'
console.log(name)
```

As we can see  even if a variable is of const type we can write or update which is completly valid for variable holding an object , since object's keys are not protected here we are able to alter and add to them. The value stored on name is still an object. If we are looking for immutability, consider using object.freeze(introduced in ES5.1), 

object.freeze() method will freeze and prevent new properties from bieng added.

```jsx
const name = {
    fname:'deepak'
}
Object.freeze(name)
name.fname='ajay';
name.lname='sarkar';

console.log(name);
```

output

```jsx
{
    "fname": "deepak"
}
```