# Closures

# **Objectives:**

By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:

- Explain what a closure is
- Use closure to create "private" variables
- Create a module using the module pattern
- Understand what the keyword `arguments` represents and how it can be used

# **Closure**

One of the most difficult concepts to understand when first learning JavaScript is `closure`. Let's take a stab at a definition:

> Closure is when a function is able to access variables from an outer function that has already returned.
> 

Thanks to JavaScript's inner workings, a function is able to remember variables defined in functions even if that function has returned. Let's see what we mean by that with an example.

**`function** **outer**(a){
    **return** **function** **inner**(b){
        **return** a + b;
    }
}

outer(5) *// this returns the inner function// this calls the inner function right away*
outer(5)(2) *// 7// we can store the inner function in a variable*
let laterAdd = outer(10)

*// we can now call that inner function*
laterAdd(15) *// 25// but how was the inner function able to remember the parameter "a" defined in the outer function which already returned? The answer is through closure.*`

# **Closures in the wild**

There are many use cases for closures. One of the more common ones is to create a "private variable," or a variable that can not be accessed directly (and overwritten). Here's an example that uses closure to create a "private" variable.

**`function** **defineAge**(){
    let age = 28;
    **return** **function** **growUp**(){
        **return** ++age;
    }
}

let ageOnce = defineAge();
ageOnce(); *// 29*
ageOnce(); *// 30*`

So who can access our `age` variable? Only the `defineAge` function, which has returned, and the `growUp` function, which, through the use of closure, has access to the `age` variable. Amazingly, this is true even though the outer function `defineAge` has already returned. Our `age` variable is now protected and no one can gain access to it! In cases like this, we say that `growUp` (the inner function) has *closure over* the scope of `defineAge`.

Let's look at another example:

**`function** **createInstructors**(){
    let instructors = ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim"];
    **return** {
        **showInstructors**: **function** **displayAllInstructors**(){
            **return** instructors;
        },
        **addInstructor**: **function** **addNewInstructor**(instructor){
            instructors.push(instructor)
            **return** instructors;
        }
    }
}

let firstClass = createInstructors();
firstClass.addInstructor("Jennifer");
firstClass.showInstructors(); *// ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim", "Jennifer"]*

let secondClass = createInstructors();
secondClass.addInstructor("Ashley"); *// ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim", "Ashley"]// on one line*

let instructors = createInstructors().showInstructors(); ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim"]`

Now that one line we just wrote was pretty neat! `let instructors = createInstructors().showInstructors();`, but could we do better? What if we do not want to call `createInstructors` every time, so that we could write something like `createInstructors.showInstructors()`? To do that, we can use IIFEs!

`let instructorModule = (**function** **createInstructors**(){
    let instructors = ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim"];
    **return** {
        **showInstructors**: **function** **displayAllInstructors**(){
            **return** instructors;
        },
        **addInstructor**: **function** **addNewInstructor**(instructor){
            instructors.push(instructor)
            **return** instructors;
        }
    }
})();`

What we have just created is a small `module`, which is a piece of code that is encapsulated and can be reused quite easily. The pattern we just used to write our code is famously called the module pattern! It's a great way to wrap everything in an IIFE that contains private data that can not be accessed globally. We can even refactor this more so that our logic is not in the `return` statement.

`let instructorModuleRefactored = (**function** **createInstructors**(){
    let instructors = ["Elie", "Matt", "Tim"];
    **function** **displayAllInstructors**(){
        **return** instructors;
    }
    **function** **addNewInstructor**(instructor){
        instructors.push(instructor);
        **return** instructors;
    }
    **return** {
        showInstructors: displayAllInstructors,
        addInstructor: addNewInstructor
    }
})();`

# **More on closures**

If you would like to see some more examples on closures take a look at the video below. The slides for this video are [here](https://slides.com/eschoppik/deck-1-2-3-4#/)

# **The arguments array (well not exactly...)**

Every single time that a function is called, we get access to a special keyword called `arguments` which looks like an array (it is not EXACTLY an array, but we will cover the reason why a bit later) and can be accessed using `[]` notation. Here is an example:

**`function** **logAll**(){
    console.log(arguments);
}

logAll(2,2); *// [2,2]*
logAll(10,5,4); *// [10,5,4]*
logAll(1); *// [1]***function** **displayFirstArgument**(){
    **return** arguments[0];
}

displayFirstArgument(10,20); *// [10]*
displayFirstArgument(**true**); *// [true]*
displayFirstArgument(); *// []*`

So what do we mean when we say not "exactly" an array? Let's see what happens if we try to use the `push` method on the `arguments` keyword

**`function** **tryPushOnArguments**(){
    arguments.push("another one");
    **return** arguments;
}

tryPushOnArguments(); *// Uncaught TypeError: arguments.push is not a function*`

The reason this is happening is because even though the `arguments` keyword looks like an array and even has a `length` property, it is actually **not** an array. It is a special kind of object.

Manipulating this `arguments` array-like object can be useful, for instance, when you don't know how many arguments someone will pass in to your function:

**`function** **add**() {
    let total = 0;
    **for** (let i = 0; i < arguments.length; i++) {
        total += arguments[i]; *// this is shorthand for total = total + arguments[i]*
    }
    **return** total;
}

add(1,2,3); *// 6*
add(1,-2,3,-4); *// -2*
add(); *// 0*`

# **Exercises**

Answer the following questions:

- What is a closure?
- List two reasons why closures are useful
- What is a module?
- What is the `arguments` array-like object?
- Why do we call `arguments` an `array-like-object`?
- Write a function called `createCounter`. This function should contain a variable `count` that is initialized to `0`. This function should return another function that when invoked, increments the counter by 1 and returns the count variable. You should be able to create multiple counters with the `createCounter` function and they should all have their own private variable called `count`.

`let firstCounter = createCounter();

firstCounter(); *// 1*
firstCounter(); *// 2*
firstCounter(); *// 3*
firstCounter(); *// 4*

let secondCounter = createCounter();

secondCounter(); *// 1*
secondCounter(); *// 2*
secondCounter(); *// 3*

firstCounter(); *// 5*
firstCounter(); *// 6*

secondCounter(); *// 4*`

# **`countdown`**

- Write a function called `countdown` that accepts a number as a parameter and every 1000 milliseconds decrements the value and console.logs it. Once the value is 0 it should log "DONE!" and stop.

`countDown(4);
*// 3// 2// 1// "DONE!"*`

# **`randomGame`**

- Write a function called `randomGame` that selects a random number between 0 and 1 every 1000 milliseconds and each time that a random number is picked, add 1 to a counter. If the number is greater than `.75`, stop the timer and return the number of tries it took before we found a number greater than `.75`.

# **`isEven`**

- Write a function called `isEven` which takes in a number and returns true if the number is even and returns false if it is not

`isEven(2); *// true*
isEven(3); *// false*`

# **`isOdd`**

- Write a function called `isOdd` which takes in a number and returns true if the number is odd and returns false if it is not

`isOdd(3); *// true*
isOdd(14); *// false*`

# **`isPrime`**

- Write a function called `isPrime` which takes in a number and returns true if the number is a prime number (is greater than 1 and can only be divided in whole by itself and 1), otherwise returns false

`isPrime(8); *// false*
isPrime(17); *// true*`

# **`numberFact`**

- Write a function called `numberFact` which takes in a number and a callback and returns the result of the callback with the number passed to it

`numberFact(59,isEven); *// false*
numberFact(59,isOdd); *// true*
numberFact(59,isPrime); *// true*`

# **`find`**

- Write a function called `find`. It should take in an array and a callback and return the first value found in the array that matches the condition.

`find([8,11,4,27], **function**(val){**return** val >= 10}); *// 11*
find([8,11,4,27], **function**(val){**return** val === 5}); *// undefined*`

# **`findIndex`**

- Write a function called `findIndex`. It should take in an array and a callback and return the index of first value found in the array that matches the condition.

*`// returns 1 (index of the first value greater than or equal to 10)*
findIndex([8,11,4,27], **function**(val){**return** val >= 10});

findIndex([8,11,4,27], **function**(val){**return** val === 7}); *// undefined*`

# **`specialMultiply`**

- Write a function called `specialMultiply` which accepts two parameters. If the function is passed both parameters, it should return the product of the two. If the function is only passed one parameter - it should return a function which can later be passed another parameter to return the product. You will have to use **closure** and **arguments** to solve this.

`specialMultiply(3,4); *// 12*
specialMultiply(3)(4); *// 12*
specialMultiply(3); *// returns a function*`

# **Solutions**

You can find solutions to the exercises [here](https://github.com/rithmschool/intermediate_javascript_solutions/blob/master/timers_and_callbacks_exercise/solution.js)